institutional idea, man, to realize that there
were two constraints on what was going on in Navy
research. If you had a private industry, that
company had to make profit.
If you had the Navy, you had to have something to go
on a ship to fight a war with.
And This did put constraint on people's thinking.
The worst case that I had was in a certain
laboratory where when I'd go down to talk about the
research program, they would put the comptroller
in his head at the table. And just the fact of the
man's presence there with the dollar sign
swinging from his neck almost made the fellows in
the laboratory very cautious and even cut down on
what I thought I wanted to see. The biggest single
thing that I know of, two biggest single things
that I know of to handle this problem was Gordon
Lill's beginning the informal coordinating
committee on oceanography and Finn and Jennings
and Fetter and Lill and Maxwell and others
initiating the Tannock plans. At least This
answers the criticism of the Navy that we were just
asking for carte blanche. At least we indicated
where we hoped to go, and they could buy it or not buy
it. Unfortunately, they didn't buy it.
While working in Scripps, while you were involved
in doing research,
Well, they let me work on bathy thermographs a
little bit, and things of that kind, and little
projects of measuring temperature in the sea, but
really the GI Bill of Rights carried the tuition,
and I was so unfitted to be a scientist that it took
all my time really to keep up at all. Dr. on the final
verbal exam. He gave us a lecture on the Gulf Stream
the day before. And the next day, my examination in
French was the exact text that he had coded from.
The text of the Gulf Stream. That's where his
genius lay, that he knew I'd never get through my
language requirement otherwise.
Now, while you're though at Scripps, now Ravel
comes back, doesn't he? Ravel came back as
director of MPL, it seems to me, and a co-director
with Carl Eckert at one time. I remember just about
the time we left Scripps, he came back, yes. I don't
know what, I'm confused as to what he was, where he
was, 46 to 48, I don't know. Okay. Do you seem to
remember, was his return back to Scripps welcomed
with enthusiasm or not welcomed with enthusiasm?
Oh, I think so. I think so, and I, with all due
respect to... Carl Eckhart? No, the director,
present director of Scripps. Nirenberg?
Nirenberg. who has
made, I think, a very, very wonderful record. It
was something of a surprise, though, that when the
big university campus was established, to many of
us, that Roger didn't get it. Throughout the
University of California at San Diego? Now, here
again, it could be... It's a difference in aim and
the necessities of the case. The University of
California had, what, 20,000 students they had to
take care of, whereas Roger wanted to make Scripps
an ivory tower of excellence. And as a matter of
fact, the compromise worked out pretty well, I
think. But you can see what the very strong
feelings must have been at the time, and who was
right, I don't know. Well... The whole point of
this being is that in this period of time, several
oceanographic institutions are rising into
periods of excellence. As a matter of fact,
Challengers to Woodhull, turning out competent
PhDs. What was your impression of the sudden
implosion and explosion of oceanography between
about 45, really 48 and 56, first of all? I thought
it was terribly exciting sitting over at the
Bureau of Ships. I was called in on... as
a representative to watch it. I remember the
International Geophysical Year was such a
wonderful move forward, and yet you'll have to
look at that we had some very practical men at the
head of it. There were four institutions who got
the majority of the funding of that year. On the
east coast it was Columbus, Island, and Woods
Hole. On the west coast it was Revelle and Scripps.
And I won't say satellites, but Miami on one side,
Texas A&M on the other. That's the way it went. And
as soon as that had been decided, then they got down
to basic research. As soon as they split the funds
up. I didn't say that.
The In the early days, it was a very lucky thing that
people who had the broad vision and also the
ability to write these papers on which large
amounts of money were transferred were still
around. Plus Wakelin over in R&D there. It was just
a bunch of wonderful coincidences, plus a devoted
effort on the part of everybody involved. These
people were... were dead serious. They had a
dream. And, uh, Morris Ewing had his, Ravel had
his, Spitter had his, and the, Columbus had his.
The, the great leaders of that old Harrison
Brown's Oceanographic, uh, National
Oceanographic Committee, marvelous. the job
that they did. Did you seem to think that Sputnik in
57 put much input into the development of
oceanography? Yes, it did from the popular mind.
Very, very decidedly so, as Rechnitz and the
others will tell you, and I've talked it over with
him. I had him down here to talk about it. The
Trieste deep dive to the Marianas Trench was the
only big outstanding scientific event that we
could show in the earth sciences field that in
magnitude came anywhere close to Sputnik. And it
was our only answer to it for some time then. I think
the Trieste Diver was completely justified on
that one basis. That has to be the only basis. What
about Moho? Moho got mixed up in the politics.
Perhaps it's well that it didn't go through with
all the expense because of the plate theory. Now it
seems to say that they wouldn't have found too much
anyhow. I don't know. But I would have liked to have
seen it done. There's a cute story in connection
with that. Gordon Little had to answer a letter to
ONR from an old Navy chief. Please don't let them
bore that hole in the ocean because you know what's
going to happen. All gravity is going to leak out of
it and we'll all be out and out of space.
How do you explain the politics that were
obviously involved in Moho vis-a-vis what seems
to be a lack of politics in the Trieste mission? Am I
misconstruing those two missions? No, not at all.
The Trieste was a single agency thing. Bob Dietz
went over there and came back with a wonderful
report.
When I bought the view, I remember sitting around
at the conference table, about nine people, and
me, I'm scared of the dark and all that sort of
stuff. And I said, well, who in the world would go
down in the dark thing anyhow? And to my amazement,
nine people's hands, who I highly respected as
scientists as well as administrators, went up.
And with that encouragement, O&R had it. Now, O&R,
after that big dive, though, it was a white
elephant to them. Yeah. And we took it over, and it
was a white elephant to us to a certain extent,
except that what we learned from it about deep
submergence and the hull stuff, which is a whole
area in itself that I think more than justified
doing it. But again, it was two agencies, not more
than two agencies talking, where my captain could
say, yes, we'll put $800,000 on the line. And in
Mohul, there's more than two agencies,
certainly. Well, AMSOC was a social drinking
society and a good time society taken over by
Bascom and his group as the name of their
committee. And you had people from the scientific
as well as the industrial. You had to bring in the
industrial people. The Navy couldn't do it all by
themselves, even on the survey part of it. And so
your politics got into it, and then, of course, it
got into Brown and Root, and there you are. Would
you like to make any comments about Brown and Root?
No, I won't make any comments, because I didn't
know anything about it, except what I read in the
papers. I just thought that it ballooned quite a
lot.
Now, after 57, when the first expansion of...
Well, between 57 and 63, you create oceanography
departments all across the country, largely with
funds aided by ONR. ONR directed and affected the
development of those old departments of
oceanography. What about the Bureau of Ships'
role in that?
Well, I think that's when my programs began to
become solely dependent upon ONR in support of
good research like Waldo Lyon and Gene Lafon and
others in the Navy laboratories. There was a
function of support of research wherever it was
that ONR had to fulfill and of course you had to take
care of its own parent organization's outfits and
with few exceptions we had good scientists on
those programs. The use Another thing that was
occurring at that time was that the old know-how
was going out of the Bureau of Ships, and actually
out of the Navy, being contracted to industrial
firms, and this called for more and more
reorganization and more diversification. It had
to be, for instance, people in the landlocked
states of Idaho and places like that began to get
into oceanography. study programs, well, that's
all right. Some of the best geologists came out of
Arizona. Now, what's your reaction to your
reorganization now as your bureau changes,
really, in this period?
What really changed and what ended my program as I
knew it, and it was time for me to retire when it did,
was when the source of funds at ONR were changed.
There is a category called 6.1, which is the
research end of the whole research and
development testing material train. And as long
as I had the money from ONR, I could have this 20% and
30% freedom of basic research in my laboratory
programs. But after that went out, And I think it
was in order to support the MISAR that year. And
I've gotten over all bitterness about the
decision. This left only the next category, which
administrators could not apply to research. They
had to apply to development. And this meant that a
great many of the people I had ceased to be funded or
were turned on to projects, which were, what is Mr.
Mansfield's relevance. Funding based upon
relevance. And I think that perhaps this division
of authority, certainly they have carried it out
to the Hydrographic Office even right now. That's
my next question. It seems to me that after the
Mansfield Amendment, as it's called, there
seemed to be a retiring in the upper echelons of all
the agencies involved in oceanography. is that
because of age factors or because of the change in
the direction of the bureaucratic institutions?
Well, I think it was a lot of things. I think the
main, perhaps to me, the main thing was the change
of administration just as the
Stratton Report came out. I think if the Stratton
Report had come out at the beginning of, say, Jack
Kennedy's administration, you would have seen a
completely different picture. Okay. Did you find
the Nixon administration less receptive to
research and development than the Kennedy
administration? I wasn't then under Nixon for
very long.
Did you notice a... Do you understand any
political climate before the Mansfield
Amendment that seems to indicate that direction
towards applied research on it? In other words,
did the Mansfield Amendment take you by surprise?
Well, I'm a person who has to get his news filtered
down because I don't like to be shocked every
morning by the reversals of decisions. So I was so
far out of the politics of the thing, and really my
opinion would be absolutely worthless on that. I
do think that this... proliferation that you've
spoken of had already gone on and the types of
research for which well you can always nitpick and
I think the climate changed because I don't in my
opinion
I don't believe the administration under
President Johnson understood oceanography to
the same extent that the seagoing, yachting-type
people of Kennedy did. And
for what it's worth, it's my opinion, there's a
change of administration, and then the, well, you
had the Vietnam War on top of your work. The money
was, the armed services were needing every nickel
to keep going, and there were some, some things had
to be and I think I have no objection to what
Mansfield said at that time. I do hope that it will
not be always so literally applied. While you were
at the Bureau of Ships, did you seem to, did there
seem to be an increase in international
oceanography, if I coin a word for you,
international cooperation that you were aware
of? I was aware of it simply because of the people
that were involved. Gene Lafon, who was my man at
NUC, I was over as a secretary of the
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Committee.
Warren Worcester, who was my classmate at
Scripps, was over there for a long while. And such
international meetings as, well, the big one, of
course, was the 1959 International Congress in
New York. And I didn't get in on all the others, but I
got in on a few of them. And yes, I would say among
them, Well, even to some extent with the Russians,
I thought there was a great increase of
information. Did this come as a surprise to you as a
man largely always attached to naval
functionaries? Not really, because as far as I can
see, the pattern is that when they know more than we
do, we don't hear from them. When we know more than
they do, they're always there. So I'm rather
cynical on that question. Many accomplished, you
know, there are no shows in certain fields.
Finally, tell me what you think were the great
instrumentational breakthroughs
which seemed to shape oceanography, or change the
nature of oceanography for you, beside the BT.
Precision depth recorder. Precision depth
recorder. That is what you think... They
started Woods Hole and perfected it much more, the
oceanographic tower. This is inshore stuff.
You have to give airborne heat surveys to their
proper place.
The oceanographic ship as an entity and as a tool,
not just here and there, but as a necessary tool for
each institution.
The satellite navigation and the underwater
sound positioning.
And you have to go back, this is a system, but it was
the development of, we paid for the first ones. the
underwater beepers and bottom location, and
above all, the unclassified little three-point
station in the Pacific of Ewing's called the SOFAR
system. Now, all those things you've listed have
been primarily... measuring devices and devices
attached to what I would call exploration of the
seas. Do you see that the kind of work continuing in
the future of oceanography, or do you think those
devices were so effective that that sort of
oceanography is ending? Well, I have a friend up in
Cambridge who's working on an airborne altimeter
using a laser beam. And they aren't satisfied
until they get that kind of precision. So you think
the precision measurements then will continue?
The big problem in the whole thing is the
condensation of data. You've got data running out
of your ears now, some of it biased and some of it...
I would like to see, at this time, when there is a
little bit of a doldrum in research and people
looking at the way they should go, a review of the
Stratton Report and also a down to earth, maybe by
the National Science Foundation or National
Academy, some crowd like that, is to say, now,
where do we stop taking data? and spend a couple of
years and the money consolidating it until we have
weaned out of it all we can get before we go into a new
instrumentation program. At the same time, there
has to be an ongoing project to apply to the oceans
all of the marvelous developments in electronics
that are going on and in the nuclear field that are
going on so fast that the average oceanographer
doesn't know what tools are available again. I
don't know how to put that together. I should think
it would be a function of NOAA.
So you don't... Make sure I'm inferring this
correctly, but you feel... I do not think that we
should spend a lot of money on ships today
surveying, continually getting additional
data, until we have cooked what we have and gotten
an essence out of it. Good, that's exactly what I
want to know. What about the computer? You can't,
it's got to be there. There's certain problems
that you can't take the wave problem. Now, there's
where your ivory tower comes in. I think Walter
Monk's group on waves, I wish he'd stay with the
waves instead of going out and earth wobbling and
all that, but he's too big a man to tie down. But I'd
like to see that thing worked out theoretically to
the limit before we go out and take any more wave
measurements.
Now you could sell a great deal more of this if you
would get a good tsunami prediction system that
isn't dependent upon whether or not the
lighthouse keeper gets drunk that night. I'd like
to see a better, a better, a great deal, I'm
delighted to see all this work on earthquake
prediction. Because the public needs this. You
can go along just so long before the democracy
demands its pound of flesh.
Now, only on this line, I have one more question.
The use of glamour fields has sort of come and gone
in the last several years in oceanography, you
know, nuclear physics, physical oceanography.
Some, of course, never came in, like marine
biology and oceanography. What do you think will
be the glamour field in oceanography in the
future?
Sometime we're going to have to pay the bill of all
this advertising about what the oceans can do for
humanity. And how are we going to do that with 77
nations saying, get off my back?
Somehow you've got to bring back the dream of the
oceans as something useful to the man in the
street. How are we doing, Paul? Good. Now, that's
the last series of questions I want to ask you. I
have four specific questions I want you to offer
your opinion on. You don't have to pretend to be an
expert on this. Aquaculture, are you optimistic?
Yes, I am. I've been reading the Marine Letter of
the Tri-State, Virginia, North and South
Carolina. I believe that out of that is going to
come something that will be commercial success.
And certainly it'll be the only way of saving what
we have got. Okay. In terms of aquaculture, do you
think it'll produce anything but specialty foods
like shellfish or crustaceans? Do you think
it'll? No, I think it's going to have to be for the
next 20 years. We're lucky if we get one line of mass
production out of it. Okay. Do you see any hope for
such things as plankton and kelp, for example, in
mariculture? I was thinking mainly of my
particular love of the marshes. No, I don't know
anything about the deep sea. Okay. Secondly,
mining the sea for minerals other than manganese
and oil, I suppose. Are you optimistic about any of
that in terms of being productive? Not except in
special cases of sands and different types of...
certain types of... chalks and things of that
kind, where it is economically useful in the area
where they do it. So for example, phosphates off
North Carolina, you'd be optimistic about that,
but not if it can bring the cost down where it's
competitive, yes. Thirdly, the sea and
pollution. this is a discussion now on most
people, involving both nuclear waste and the
alleged dying sea and so forth. Do you have any
reaction to that? Yeah. It scared me at first, but I
think I got over-scared. The same way that people
got over-scared about automobile exhausts.
I think it was Columbus, isn't it, once said that
the human being is over 10 million years have been
adapting to change after change after change, ice
age and everything else conditions. I'm not going
to be too frightened of having to adapt to others. I
do think this, this is one area in which I think
emphasis should be given. Just how close are we to a
critical condition in the ocean? Is it all fear of
people who love the ocean and Or is it a physical
fact? It's like the ozone layer. Let's get the fact
on the thing. Well, do you think that publicists in
opposition to pollution, people who are not
really scientists, for example, like Jacques
Cousteau, do you think they are a positive good or
moderately positive good, or do they hurt the
cause of acquiring the facts? Well, as Rosamund
said, never mind what they say about me. Every time
they publish my name, it helps. Yeah. Well, those
are not against us as far as I'm focused on. I think
his lectures and his movies have done more to bring
people back to a knowledge of what's really in the
sea. I think his educational programs are fine. Of
course, he's a master showman. Why shouldn't they
be? I'm for him. You have no other. You have NATO,
for instance, in the other area is pretty well
damned by the man who has to buy an exhaust control.
Who else is speaking for this on an international
worldwide basis any better? And that leads to my
last question in an international worldwide way.
What is your opinion on the rising political
problems in oceanography? 200-mile limits,
international conferences that are occurring
now. Do you think that threatens the academic
discipline? Yes, I think it threatens the
untrammeled collection of information. In other
words, In the old days, Ewing could send a vessel
off the coast to any coast he wanted to and take his
seismic reading. Now he's got to go through a lot of
red tape. It's going to be more difficult. If it's
handled correctly, well, if it can be handled
where the national business...
I'm torn. I'm torn between the one world of
scientific control and my complete fear of
dictatorship.
I think perhaps... Hayek, whatever his name is,
has it better, that the untrammeled minds of free
men working together, even from a selfish basis,
can do more and will be better for humanity than any
controlled oligarchy dictatorship on the thing.
The Law of the Sea Conference is a perfect mirror of
the old international situation, I think. At the
present time, I'm a nationalist. I don't believe
that we should necessarily subsidize the man
who's going to go out and make a profit mining the
ocean. We should know what his interests are,
though, and protect them to the extent that we can,
and perhaps even to our advantage. But I would like
to see absolutely free research if the
information is given to the other countries.
without the necessity of having to go through all
kind of customs of having people on board and that
sort of business.
Okay, now, would you list in the major items that
you think of importance very quickly before? The
first was the writing of the oceans by...